User guidance for branch naming (#744)
payu-org/payu: docs/source/usage.rst

      payu branch --verbose # Display local branches metadata 
      payu branch --remote # Display remote branches UUIDs

Control directory and branch naming guidance
--------------------------------------------

> As described above, when using branches the experiment name is generated from the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As described above, when using branches, the experiment name is generated from the combination of
```

*control directory*, the branch name and the unique experiment UUID.

It can be useful to think of the *control directory* name as the top level of a 
namespace_ in which the branch name must be unique only for that control directory 

> git repository [#fbranch]_.

Reviewer 2: This isn't a common approach to using payu, because you can only run one experiment at once.

Mostly users will clone each experiment into seperate folders so they can run all the experiments simultaneously.

Author: > Mostly users will clone each experiment into seperate folders so they can run all the experiments simultaneously.

I've seen plenty of examples where that isn't the case. Regardless there is nothing I've written that precludes multiple clones, each with their own unique experiment branch that could all be pushed to a common repo.

We could add something about how to manage multiple clones to enable parallel runs, but it is currently out of scope for what I'm describing here.

Reviewer 2: > Regardless there is nothing I've written that precludes multiple clones, each with their own unique experiment branch that could all be pushed to a common repo.

What would the name(s) be?

It's likely they would end up repeating the branch name, leading to repetition in experiment names ... which leads to redundancy in names / messy names in the intake catalog ( I think) 

e.g. I clone three times into three folders:

* `MC_25km_jra_ryf-control`
* `MC_25km_jra_ryf-mix_plus`
* `MC_25km_jra_ryf-mix_minus`

and I repeat those as the branch name (so they are clear what they are when in the remote git repository), so the experiment name becomes:

This would give three branches in the ``access-om3-MC_25km_jra_ryf`` control directory
with experiment names like:

* `access-om3-MC_25km_jra_ryf-control-MC_25km_jra_ryf-control-505191d6`
* `access-om3-MC_25km_jra_ryf-control-MC_25km_jra_ryf-mix_plus-137f7f2e`
* `access-om3-MC_25km_jra_ryf-control-MC_25km_jra_ryf-mix_minus-216c9431`

(and hence the question about just changing the experiment name)

> We could add something about how to manage multiple clones to enable parallel runs, but it is currently out of scope for what I'm describing here.

The issue just says:

_it would be a good idea to have some guidance on branch and control directory naming strategies._

the guidance would be incomplete without dealing with running multiple experiments at once

Author: > e.g. I clone three times into three folders:
> 
> * `MC_25km_jra_ryf-control`
> * `MC_25km_jra_ryf-mix_plus`
> * `MC_25km_jra_ryf-mix_minus`

Ah, yes well I wouldn't recommend that.

This would work:

`control/MC_25km_jra_ryf`
`mix_plus/MC_25km_jra_ryf`
`mix_minus/MC_25km_jra_ryf`

But still clunky. See https://github.com/payu-org/payu/issues/746

Author: > the guidance would be incomplete without dealing with running multiple experiments at once

I think naming guidance is fine. Running in parallel is separate guidance IMO.

Author: I'll resolve this, as I think documenting how to run experiments in parallel can be handled in a separate PR. It is also likely to be much easier to do if #746 gets fixed, so best to do it then.

So the *control directory* should have a name that when added to the branch name makes

> sense and provides a sensible grouping for all the branches.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The *control directory* therefore should have a name that, when combined with the branch name, is
meaningful and provides a sensible grouping for all the branches.
```

.. _namespace: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Namespace

Cloning a simple experiment
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When cloning the simple MOM5 bowl1 example from the payu repository 

https://github.com/payu-org/bowl1.git

> it would be fine to use the repository name (``bowl1``) as the control directory 

Reviewer 2: does this need to say which branch is cloned from bowl1 ?

Author: I don't think so. The example gives 3 branch names as examples. It isn't relevant what branch is cloned I think. This isn't covering how to clone repos, just focussing on how to name branches (and experiments).

> name, but in this case, as it is a MOM5 experiment, the *control directory* will be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
name, but in this case, as it is a MOM5 experiment, the *control directory* is expected to be
```

> name, but in this case, as it is a MOM5 experiment, the *control directory* is expected to be

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
name, but in this case, as it is a MOM5 experiment, the *control directory* is given the more accurate name
```
?

> ``mom5_bowl1``.

Reviewer 2: it what sense is it expected to be `mom5_bowl1` ?

Is this just `mom5_bowl1` is a more descriptive name ?

Author: Yeah. It's an arbitrary choice. Would 

> the *control directory* is set to `mom5_bowl1` to reflect this and make it more descriptive

be better?

> As an example use case, consider a group of related experiments to explore the effect 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As an example use case, consider a group of related experiments, run sequentially from a single control directory, to explore the effect 
```

A bit of a long sentence now ...

of changing the diffusivity, which require a control experiment and two other experiments
where the diffusivity is halved compared to the control, and another doubled. Then 

> then branch names could be: ``control``, ``diff_double``, ``diff_halve``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As an example use case, consider a group of related experiments to explore the effect 
of changing the diffusivity. This requires a control experiment, one experiment where the 
diffusivity is halved compared to the control, and another experiment with doubled diffusivity. 
In this case, suitable branch names could be: ``control``, ``diff_halve``, ``diff_double``.
```

These three branches in the ``mom5_bowl1`` control directory would result in experiment 
names like:

* ``mom5_bowl1-control-c3de94ac``
* ``mom5_bowl1-diff_double-daed6c85``

> * ``mom5-bowl1-diff_halve-1dba6dac``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* ``mom5_bowl1-diff_halve-1dba6dac``
```

Reviewer: Also recommend to swap `diff_halve` and `diff_double` to keep consistent orders

Naming schemes will depend a lot on the use case. For example using the same ``bowl1`` 
repository as a base, if the intention is to create a group of related idealised MOM5 
experiments then it might make sense to name the cloned repository ``mom5_idealised`` 

> and the branches ``bowl1``, ``single_column``, ``dome`` and ``double_gyre``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Naming schemes will depend a lot on the use case. For example, using the same ``bowl1`` 
repository as a base, if the intention is to create a group of related idealised MOM5 
experiments, it might make sense to name the cloned repository ``mom5_idealised``, 
with branches such as ``bowl1``, ``single_column``, ``dome`` and ``double_gyre``.
```

> named ``mom5_idealised``.  The branches could then correspond to well known 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
idealised configurations, it could be convenient to have a single directory 
named ``mom5_idealised``.  The branches could then correspond to well known 
```

?

> These four brances would result in experiment names like:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These four branches would result in experiment names like:
```

* ``mom5_idealised-bowl1-82664df5``
* ``mom5_idealised-single_column-8035e206``
* ``mom5_idealised-dome-9f3c7e0a``
* ``mom5_idealised-double_gyre-bafb77b6``

> In the second use-case, ``bowl1`` is the branch name, whereas in the first case it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the second use case, ``bowl1`` is the branch name, whereas in the first case it
```
Just for consistency across the documents.

was part of the control directory name. There are no rigid rules, it depends on

> the use case.

Reviewer 2: Do this second use case add much ? It's pretty similar to the first

Author: The intention was to show how branch name choice depends on the use-case. I thought it more closely mirrored the example of a repo where you are collecting together a number of different experiments, compared to the first one which is about a group of closely related experiments.

If it isn't useful as an example I can delete it.

Reviewer 2: It took me a couple of reads to figure out how the use case was different, I guess because I don't think about these idealised cases very much.  I think our users are pretty clever and would figure this out themselves. If having `bowl1` in the repository name isn't more descriptive, they'd figure out how to do something different

Author: In https://github.com/payu-org/payu/pull/744/changes/ad9a8d31a41360e5bd657e346ff806c056652307 I have modified the wording of that example to try and make the user case clearer. If you still don't think it is worth including I can delete it.

Cloning an ACCESS-NRI configuration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

As another example, when cloning a configuration such as ACCESS-OM3 25km global 
Ocean Sea-Ice configuration (``release-MC_25km_jra_ryf``): 

https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-om3-configs/tree/release-MC_25km_jra_ryf

the default repository name would be ``access-om3-configs``. It does not make
sense to use this as the control directory name. The repository is named for 

> it's function, which is to curate and release *all* ACCESS-OM3 configurations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default repository name would be ``access-om3-configs``. It is not recommended
to directly use this as the control directory name, since the default repository name is to 
curate and release *all* ACCESS-OM3 configurations.
```

> Similarly the branch that would being cloned (``release-MC_25km_jra_ryf``) is named

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similarly, the branch that would be cloned (``release-MC_25km_jra_ryf``) is named
```

to make it unique in the repo which collects and curates *all* ACCESS-OM3 configurations.
In this case a modified version of the branch name is a better *control directory* 
name: ``access-om3-MC_25km_jra_ryf`` to indicate this is a set of ACCESS-OM3 25km global 

> Ocean Sea-Ice simulations using JRA55 repeat-year forcing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this case, a modified version of the branch name is a better *control directory* 
name, e.g., ``access-om3-MC_25km_jra_ryf``, indicating that this is a set of ACCESS-OM3 25km global 
Ocean Sea-Ice simulations using JRA55 repeat-year forcing.
```

As an example use case, consider a set of experiments to explore the effect of
modifying mixing parameters, requiring a control experiment, an experiment where

> an amount of subtracted from the mixing parameter, and another where the same

Reviewer: ```suggestion
modifying mixing parameters. This might require a control experiment, an experiment where
an amount is subtracted from the mixing parameter, and another where the same
```

This will be helpful in debugging environment issues or providing necessary details 
when reporting an issue.

.. rubric:: Footnotes

.. [#fbranch] The branch name must be unique for any repository it will be pushed to. 
If the intention is to push multiple control repositories to a single repo this must 

> be taken into account to avoid branch naming conflicts.

Reviewer: Space might be required at the front. The current footnote formatting is broken:

<img width="840" height="128" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/f602a514-e174-4018-a9e4-cece39f37595" />

Author: Thanks! Well spotted. Fixed in https://github.com/payu-org/payu/pull/744/commits/9e96c4f813670026a3f1ad24adb4ecdc99b63cca
